Add section Preparing kernel arguments (#541)
NVIDIA/cuda-python: cuda_bindings/docs/source/overview.md

With data prep and resources allocation finished, the kernel is ready to be
launched. To pass the location of the data on the device to the kernel execution
configuration, you must retrieve the device pointer. In the following code
example, we call `int(XXclass)` to retrieve the device pointer value for the
associated XXclass as a Python `int` and wrap it in a `np.array` type.

```python
dX = np.array([int(dXclass)], dtype=np.uint64)
dY = np.array([int(dYclass)], dtype=np.uint64)
dOut = np.array([int(dOutclass)], dtype=np.uint64)
```

The launch API `cuLaunchKernel` also expects a pointer input for the argument list
but this time it's of type `void**`. What this means is that our argument list needs to

> be a contiguous array of `void*` elements, where each element is the pointer to a kernel
> argument. Since we already prepared each of our arguments into a `np.array` type, the
> construction of our final contiguous array is done by retrieving the `XX.ctypes.data`
> of each kernel argument.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be a contiguous array of `void*` elements, where each element is the pointer to a kernel
argument on either host or device. Since we already prepared each of our arguments into a `np.array` type, the
construction of our final contiguous array is done by retrieving the `XX.ctypes.data`
of each kernel argument.
```

maximize performance ({numref}`Figure 1`).

```{figure} _static/images/Nsight-Compute-CLI-625x473.png
:name: Figure 1

Screenshot of Nsight Compute CLI output of `cuda.bindings` example.
```

## Preparing kernel arguments

The `cuLaunchKernel` API bindings retain low-level CUDA argument preparation requirements:

* Each kernel argument is a `void*` (i.e. pointer to the argument)
* `kernelParams` is a `void**` (i.e. pointer to a list of kernel arguments)
* `kernelParams` arguments are in contiguous memory

These requirements can be met with two different approaches, using either NumPy or ctypes.

### Using NumPy

NumPy [Array objects](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/arrays.html) can be used to fulfill each of these conditions directly.

Let's use the following kernel definition as an example:
```python
kernel_string = """\
struct testStruct {
    int value;
};

extern "C" __global__
void testkernel(int i, int *pi,
                float f, float *pf,
                struct testStruct s, struct testStruct *ps)
{
    *pi = i;
    *pf = f;
    ps->value = s.value;
}
"""
```

The first step is to create array objects with types corresponding to your kernel arguments.

> NumPy's user guide for [Kernel arguments](https://docs.cupy.dev/en/stable/user_guide/kernel.html#kernel-arguments) describes how primitive Numpy types correspond to kernel types,

Reviewer 2: Should this be cupy's user guide? In general we shouldn't need to link off to cupy documentation here, especially if we eventually want cupy to be depend on cuda-python in the future.

Author: Changed to cupy. Would that future dependency be specific to cuda.core? I'd imagine that cuda.core will have a more natural argument prep work than what cuda.bindings gives today.

Reviewer 2: > Would that future dependency be specific to cuda.core?

Not necessarily, but regardless I don't think we should be reliant on linking off to CuPy's documentation for our documentation in `cuda.bindings` or `cuda.core`. We should probably capture the information a user needs for the kernel arguments directly into the `cuda.bindings` docs.

Author: I see my confusion. We have a soft reliance on NumPy (as the alternative to ctypes), but I incorrectly treated CuPy and NumPy as one and the same.

I've now added the table for correspondence between NumPy types and kernel types.

pFloat_host = checkCudaErrors(cudart.cudaHostAlloc(np.dtype(np.float32).itemsize, cudart.cudaHostAllocMapped))
pStruct_host = checkCudaErrors(cudart.cudaHostAlloc(testStruct.itemsize, cudart.cudaHostAllocMapped))

# Collect all input kernel arguments into a single tuple for further processing
kernelValues = (
    np.array(1, dtype=np.uint32),
    np.array([pInt_host], dtype=np.uint64),
    np.array(123.456, dtype=np.float32),
    np.array([pFloat_host], dtype=np.uint64),
    np.array([5], testStruct),
    np.array([pStruct_host], dtype=np.uint64),
)
```

The final step is to construct a `kernelParams` argument that fulfills all of the launch API conditions. This is made easy because each array object comes
with a [ctypes](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/generated/numpy.ndarray.ctypes.html#numpy.ndarray.ctypes) data attribute that returns the underlying `void*` pointer value.

By having the final array object contain all pointers, we fulfill the contiguous array requirement:

```python
kernelParams = np.array([arg.ctypes.data for arg in kernelValues], dtype=np.uint64)
```

> The launch API supports [Buffer Protocol](https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/buffer.html) objects, therefore we can pass the array object directly.

Reviewer 2: In this case would it actually use the buffer protocol or would it use dlpack? It's a bit confusing to use numpy as the example for buffer protocol because of this.

Author: >https://github.com/NVIDIA/cuda-python/blob/main/cuda_bindings/cuda/bindings/_lib/utils.pyx.in#L58

Buffer protocol since we don't support dlpack.

```python
checkCudaErrors(cuda.cuLaunchKernel(
    kernel,
    1, 1, 1,  # grid dim
    1, 1, 1,  # block dim
    0, stream,  # shared mem and stream
    kernelParams=kernelParams,
    extra=0,
))
```

> ### Using ctypes

Reviewer 2: It would be good to have an example of using Python buffer protocol (https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/buffer.html) compatible objects as well, though I'm not sure how we'd specify the struct type in that situation.

Author: > The launch API supports [Buffer Protocol](https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/buffer.html) objects, therefore we can pass the array object directly.

I tried to give this example by leveraging Numpy's array objects since they already have the protocol. Were you thinking about having an example of a custom user object that supports a Python buffer protocol as an example?

Reviewer 2: I don't think we need to address this in this PR to be clear. Just mindful that we may want to make numpy an optional dependency in the future and if that's the case it would be nice to have an example of using buffer protocol without numpy (i.e. using the standard `array` library or something like that).

2. The value is an instance of `ctypes.Structure`
3. The value is an `Enum`

In each of these three cases, the API call will fetch the underlining pointer value and construct a contiguous array with other kernel parameters.

With the setup complete, the kernel can be launched:

```python
checkCudaErrors(cuda.cuLaunchKernel(
    kernel,
    1, 1, 1,  # grid dim
    1, 1, 1,  # block dim
    0, stream,  # shared mem and stream
    kernelParams=(kernelValues, kernelTypes),
    extra=0,
))
```

### CUDA objects

Certain CUDA kernels use native CUDA types as their parameters such as `cudaTextureObject_t`. These types require special handling since they're neither a primative ctype nor a custom user type. Since `cuda.bindings` exposes each of them as Python clases, they they each implement `getPtr()` and `__int__()`. These two callables used to support the NumPy and ctypes approach. The difference between each call is further described under [Tips and Tricks](https://nvidia.github.io/cuda-python/cuda-bindings/latest/tips_and_tricks.html#).

> For this example, lets use the `transformKernel` from [examples/0_Introduction/simpleCubemapTexture_test.py](https://github.com/NVIDIA/cuda-python/blob/main/cuda_bindings/examples/0_Introduction/simpleCubemapTexture_test.py):

Reviewer 2: The link is still an absolute path here where if we change the repo structure in the future this link could 404. Is there any way we can do some kind of relative path linking here or something similar so that we get the correct version of this example each time the docs are published?

Author: Sort of, but I don't think it's better. What I can do is:
```
For this example, lets use the `transformKernel` from [examples/0_Introduction/simpleCubemapTexture_test.py](../../examples/0_Introduction/simpleCubemapTexture_test.py):
```

What this does is it downloads a copy of the example at build time and the link them redirects users to:
`/docs/build/html/_downloads/54802b8ecbf7ce3c15adbca71c4048dd/simpleCubemapTexture_test.py`. This looks unrendered and is equivalent to a perma link.

Author: The content of the kernel doesn't actually matter for this doc, only the signature, hence why I rewrote it bellow with the shortened form:
```
simpleCubemapTexture = """\
extern "C"
__global__ void transformKernel(float *g_odata, int width, cudaTextureObject_t tex)
{
    ...
}
"""
```
The kernel is too large in my opinion to be shared here.

Reviewer 2: Resolving this, I think this is more than good enough at this point.

> For this example, lets use the `transformKernel` from [examples/0_Introduction/simpleCubemapTexture_test.py](https://github.com/NVIDIA/cuda-python/blob/73fa3c035c1111fa8e82b8ba24ed0e33eb65e6c8/cuda_bindings/examples/0_Introduction/simpleCubemapTexture_test.py):

Reviewer 2: Should this be a relative link instead of a permalink?

Author: Changed. Yeah that likely makes more sense.

  - 1080ms
```

`cuda.bindings` is also compatible with [NVIDIA Nsight
Compute](https://developer.nvidia.com/nsight-compute), which is an
interactive kernel profiler for CUDA applications. It allows you to have
detailed insights into kernel performance. This is useful when you're trying to
maximize performance ({numref}`Figure 1`).

```{figure} _static/images/Nsight-Compute-CLI-625x473.png
:name: Figure 1

Screenshot of Nsight Compute CLI output of `cuda.bindings` example.
```

## Preparing kernel arguments

The `cuLaunchKernel` API bindings retain low-level CUDA argument preparation requirements:

* Each kernel argument is a `void*` (i.e. pointer to the argument)
* `kernelParams` is a `void**` (i.e. pointer to a list of kernel arguments)
* `kernelParams` arguments are in contiguous memory

These requirements can be met with two different approaches, using either NumPy or ctypes.

### Using NumPy

NumPy [Array objects](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/arrays.html) can be used to fulfill each of these conditions directly.

Let's use the following kernel definition as an example:
```python
kernel_string = """\

> struct testStruct {
>     int value;
> };
> 
> extern "C" __global__
> void testkernel(int i, int *pi,
>                 float f, float *pf,
>                 struct testStruct s, struct testStruct *ps)

Reviewer: nit
```suggestion
typedef struct {
    int value;
} testStruct;

extern "C" __global__
void testkernel(int i, int *pi,
                float f, float *pf,
                testStruct s, testStruct *ps)
```

{
    *pi = i;
    *pf = f;
    ps->value = s.value;
}
"""
```

> The first step is to create array objects with types corresponding to your kernel arguments. Primative Numpy types have the following corresponding kernel types:

Reviewer 3: typo: **Primitive** NumPy types

NumPy is usually written with a capital P

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first step is to create array objects with types corresponding to your kernel arguments. Primitive NumPy types have the following corresponding kernel types:
```

```{list-table} Correspondence between NumPy types and kernel types.
:header-rows: 1

* - NumPy type
  - Corresponding kernel types
  - itemsize (bytes)
* - bool
  - bool
  - 1
* - int8

>   - char, signed char

Reviewer: this may be trivial but it is still good to have when eyeballing the table
```suggestion
  - char, signed char, int8_t
```

  - 1
* - int16

>   - short, signed short

Reviewer: ditto
```suggestion
  - short, signed short, int16_t
```

  - 2
* - int32

>   - int, signed int

Reviewer: ditto
```suggestion
  - int, signed int, int32_t
```

  - 4
* - int64

>   - long long, signed long long

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - long long, signed long long, int64_t
```

  - 8
* - uint8

>   - unsigned char

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - unsigned char, uint8_t
```

  - 1
* - uint16

>   - unsigned short

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - unsigned short, uint16_t
```

  - 2
* - uint32

>   - unsigned int

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - unsigned int, uint32_t
```

  - 4
* - uint64

>   - unsigned long long

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - unsigned long long, uint64_t
```

  - 8
* - float16
  - half
  - 2
* - float32
  - float
  - 4
* - float64
  - double
  - 8
* - complex64
  - float2, cuFloatComplex, complex&lt;float&gt;
  - 8
* - complex128
  - double2, cuDoubleComplex, complex&lt;double&gt;
  - 16
```

Furthermore, custom NumPy types can be used to support both platform-dependent types and user-defined structures as kernel arguments.

This example uses the following types:
* `int` is `np.uint32`
* `float` is `np.float32`

> * `int*` and `float*` is `np.uint64`

Reviewer: nit: NumPy suggested to use this for pointers
```suggestion
* `int*` and `float*` is `np.intp`
```

> * `testStruct` is a custom user type `np.dtype([("value", np.int32)])`

Reviewer: To be safe when the struct is more complex, we want to set `align=True`
```suggestion
* `testStruct` is a custom user type `np.dtype([("value", np.int32)], align=True)`
```
which would give us the same layout as a C compiler would produce.

> * `int*`, `float*` and `testStruct*` is `np.intp`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `int*`, `float*` and `testStruct*` are `np.intp`
```

> Note how both of the pointers are `np.intp` since the pointers values are always a representation of an address space.

Reviewer 3: "all three" (instead of "both")?

(maybe I'm confused what "both" is referring to?)

Putting it all together:
```python
# Define a custom type

> testStruct = np.dtype([("value", np.int32)])

Reviewer: ```suggestion
testStruct = np.dtype([("value", np.int32)], align=True)
```

# Allocate host memory
pInt_host = checkCudaErrors(cudart.cudaHostAlloc(np.dtype(np.int32).itemsize, cudart.cudaHostAllocMapped))
pFloat_host = checkCudaErrors(cudart.cudaHostAlloc(np.dtype(np.float32).itemsize, cudart.cudaHostAllocMapped))

> pStruct_host = checkCudaErrors(cudart.cudaHostAlloc(testStruct.itemsize, cudart.cudaHostAllocMapped))

Reviewer: I suggest that we either switch to just use device memory (which is the most common situation for kernels taking pointers as arguments), or make it clear that we're allocating pinned/page-locked (host) memory here that are accessible by GPU kernels.

By having the final array object contain all pointers, we fulfill the contiguous array requirement:

```python
kernelParams = np.array([arg.ctypes.data for arg in kernelValues], dtype=np.intp)
```

The launch API supports [Buffer Protocol](https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/buffer.html) objects, therefore we can pass the array object directly.

```python
checkCudaErrors(cuda.cuLaunchKernel(
    kernel,
    1, 1, 1,  # grid dim
    1, 1, 1,  # block dim
    0, stream,  # shared mem and stream
    kernelParams=kernelParams,
    extra=0,
))
```

### Using ctypes

The [ctypes](https://docs.python.org/3/library/ctypes.html) approach relaxes the parameter preparation requirement by delegating the contiguous memory requirement to the API launch call.

Let's use the following kernel definition as an example:
```python
kernel_string = """\
struct testStruct {
    int value;
};

extern "C" __global__
void testkernel(int i, int *pi,
                float f, float *pf,
                struct testStruct s, struct testStruct *ps)
{
    *pi = i;
    *pf = f;
    ps->value = s.value;
}
"""
```

> 

Reviewer: nit: maybe we just omit it and say we use the same example from the previous section?

Reviewer 3: +1

I diffed them, they are subtly different, and as a non-expert I'm wondering if that's somehow important (I guess not).

```diff
 kernel_string = """\
-typedef struct {
+struct testStruct {
     int value;
-} testStruct;
+};
 
 extern "C" __global__
 void testkernel(int i, int *pi,
                 float f, float *pf,
-                testStruct s, testStruct *ps)
+                struct testStruct s, struct testStruct *ps)
 {
```

Author: Removed and said we use same example as previous section.

The ctypes approach treats the `kernelParams` argument as a pair of two tuples: `kernel_values` and `kernel_types`.

* `kernel_values` contain Python values to be used as an input to your kernel
* `kernel_types` contain the data types that your kernel_values should be converted into

> The ctypes [Fundamental data types](https://docs.python.org/3/library/ctypes.html#fundamental-data-types) documentation describes the compatibility between different Python types and C types.

Reviewer: nit
```suggestion
The ctypes [fundamental data types](https://docs.python.org/3/library/ctypes.html#fundamental-data-types) documentation describes the compatibility between different Python types and C types.
```

Furthermore, [custom data types](https://docs.python.org/3/library/ctypes.html#calling-functions-with-your-own-custom-data-types) can be used to support kernels with custom types.

For this example the result becomes:

```python
# Define a custom type
class testStruct(ctypes.Structure):
    _fields_ = [("value", ctypes.c_int)]

# Allocate host memory
pInt_host = checkCudaErrors(cudart.cudaHostAlloc(ctypes.sizeof(ctypes.c_int), cudart.cudaHostAllocMapped))
pFloat_host = checkCudaErrors(cudart.cudaHostAlloc(ctypes.sizeof(ctypes.c_float), cudart.cudaHostAllocMapped))

> pStruct_host = checkCudaErrors(cudart.cudaHostAlloc(ctypes.sizeof(testStruct), cudart.cudaHostAllocMapped))

Reviewer: ditto

# Collect all input kernel arguments into a single tuple for further processing
kernelValues = (
    1,
    pInt_host,
    123.456,
    pFloat_host,
    testStruct(5),
    pStruct_host,
)
kernelTypes = (
    ctypes.c_int,
    ctypes.c_void_p,
    ctypes.c_float,
    ctypes.c_void_p,
    None,
    ctypes.c_void_p,
)
```

> Values that are assigned a `None` type has a special meaning:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Values that are set to `None` have a special meaning:
```

1. The value supports a callable `getPtr` that returns the pointer address of the underlining C object address (e.g. all CUDA C types that are exposed to Python as Python classes)
2. The value is an instance of `ctypes.Structure`
3. The value is an `Enum`

> In each of these three cases, the API call will fetch the underlining pointer value and construct a contiguous array with other kernel parameters.

Reviewer: nit
```suggestion
In all three cases, the API call will fetch the underlying pointer value and construct a contiguous array with other kernel parameters.
```

With the setup complete, the kernel can be launched:

```python
checkCudaErrors(cuda.cuLaunchKernel(
    kernel,
    1, 1, 1,  # grid dim
    1, 1, 1,  # block dim
    0, stream,  # shared mem and stream
    kernelParams=(kernelValues, kernelTypes),
    extra=0,
))
```

### CUDA objects

> Certain CUDA kernels use native CUDA types as their parameters such as `cudaTextureObject_t`. These types require special handling since they're neither a primative ctype nor a custom user type. Since `cuda.bindings` exposes each of them as Python clases, they they each implement `getPtr()` and `__int__()`. These two callables used to support the NumPy and ctypes approach. The difference between each call is further described under [Tips and Tricks](https://nvidia.github.io/cuda-python/cuda-bindings/latest/tips_and_tricks.html#).

Reviewer 3: Python **classes** (missing s)

there are also two "they" right after

For this example, lets use the `transformKernel` from [examples/0_Introduction/simpleCubemapTexture_test.py](https://github.com/NVIDIA/cuda-python/blob/main/cuda_bindings/examples/0_Introduction/simpleCubemapTexture_test.py):

```python
simpleCubemapTexture = """\
extern "C"
__global__ void transformKernel(float *g_odata, int width, cudaTextureObject_t tex)
{
    ...
}
"""

def main():
    ...
    d_data = checkCudaErrors(cudart.cudaMalloc(size))
    width = 64
    tex = checkCudaErrors(cudart.cudaCreateTextureObject(texRes, texDescr, None))
    ...
```

> For NumPy, we can convert these CUDA types by leveraging the `__int__()` call to fetch the adress of the underlining `cudaTextureObject_t` C object and wrapping it in a NumPy object array of type `np.uint64`:

Author: ```suggestion
For NumPy, we can convert these CUDA types by leveraging the `__int__()` call to fetch the address of the underlying `cudaTextureObject_t` C object and wrapping it in a NumPy object array of type `np.uint64`:
```
